We have to,
Right. Good morning.
Morning to see you.
Nice to see some familiar faces there too.
Um, so we've got the, uh, we've got the board
and all background material fitness.
So if there's anything you want to particularly highlight,
uh, but I think it could be some rich conversation going on
some of the, uh, material.
And I noticed that it was described as being, uh, about, um,
uh, autonomous vehicles or robocar,
but actually I thought it was more about the Model Monte
model, which I thought was the, the key, um, key take out
of, uh, out of all of that and what you can do with it.
So anyway, uh, in,
in your hands if you wanna do some intros and then, um, yeah.
Thanks Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair.
I'll just do a couple of intros.
I'm Ruth Erhu, I'm acting secretary.
Um, Paul O'Connell, who you know
before as, um, DC, um, sector strategy,
and both the modeling people
and the, um, sector strategy people
who wrote the Alta Burn this area.
And then we have Dan Jenkins, um, who's the data director
of data improvement, also has some
technical modeling people here.
So if you get technical questions about the model,
we have some people that can answer those questions now.
Cool. Um, and I'll hand over to Paul.
Thanks, Ruth. Thank you. Um, for, just bear with me.
I'd just like to start with a bit of a, uh, talk about
how we've chosen to focus on
technology and population change.
You know, why, why this?
Um, as was said in the Danish Parliament in the 1930s,
predictions are hard, particularly about the future.
Um, so of approach this, we took some advice from Confucius
who said, uh, study the past,
if you would define the future.
So I'd like to start by going back 30 years, uh, which isn't
that long in the life of our transport system.
Uh, back then I was at, uh, Burnside High in Christchurch.
Uh, and the transport network then down there is
very similar to the network.
Now. You went down Memorial Ave, uh, to get
to the city from the airport.
That road's largely unchanged now from what it was then.
Uh, and at that point it was 35 years old.
Uh, my transport experience then would've been very similar
to a teenager on Christchurch.
Today. I rode my bike to school.
I rode my bike, uh, to work on the weekends through paths
and roads that are largely the same.
Um, if I go further back the roads, my grandfather road
to get to work on the railways pages Road
and Ferry road, they're still there.
The railway lines are still there.
Um, I expect the infrastructure commission will have
mentioned this to you when they met with you, that most
of our future infrastructure is infrastructure
we already have today.
And when we look at the big transport infrastructure changes
that have happened in Canterbury over the past 30 years,
it shows how difficult those predictions are.
Uh, and large number of the big investments down there, such
as the motorway, up to roller stone,
the state highway one realignment to running Cota, they came
as a result of earthquakes that no one could have predicted.
The regulations that govern activity on the network,
they're also very similar, uh, to what they were back then.
They've been updated. But in broad form, our regulatory
and infrastructure is similar to what it was.
Then, however the population's changed,
it was 330,000, then.
It's now more than 400,000.
Uh, Rolleston isn't in that number.
They've had 800%, uh,
population growth over the same period.
And if we look at transport technology back in
1995, that's changed a lot.
I learned to drive 30 years ago in a dangerous
and, uh, very unreliable mini lovely, though it was, um,
my father had a mobile radio in his car, uh,
where he would get radio calls from a service
that picked up your phone when you weren't at home
and then radioed them to you.
Uh, they've, I think they've gone bankrupt now.
Um, my bicycle was steel and clunky, um,
and our computer was an old Apple Macintosh
that you couldn't do anything with on the network.
However, the transport technology we use now was
significantly different.
Um, cars today are arguably closer
to computers than they are to cars of the 1990s.
Uh, I've got bikes that have got electronic gearing, uh,
radars on them.
Uh, some with electric motors.
Yesterday I booked flights to Australia
with an app on my phone that's thousands
of times more powerful than my computer from the 19th.
Uh, and when it was in, in Australia last, I paid for all
of my transport by tapping my phone on a, on a reader.
So that's what we've chosen to focus on in this.
If we project out the population
and use simulation technology
that computing power has just made possible,
which we started to use last year,
what are the likely future outcomes?
And how might new transport technology affect that?
So we've got Monty, which is a digital trend of the, uh,
national Land Transport Network.
We started to use it in 2024.
Uh, and it simulates how mil millions of digital people move
around, uh, New Zealand over the course of a day.
There's no me in the model,
but there is an anonymous digital person, 1 0 5 a
who lives at my address, um,
and goes to work somewhere in the city each day.
Uh, moderny assesses the optimal way for that person
to travel throughout their city on a,
in a given scenario based on the modes
and routes available to them.
The base cases calibrated to daily traffic
and public transport use data
to represent travel in New Zealand today.
And we use it in this L tip to model two possible scenarios,
a 2055 future with population change, uh,
and an automated vehicle scenario.
So it's not just trying to, uh,
get people's mental models about this, right.
Mon Monty's not a model
where you can just ask it a question like chat GPT,
uh, and get an answer.
So the, the simulations here took three days
for the robo taxii, uh,
simulation in Napier at a 10% population level.
If, if we'd done it with a hundred percent population in ap,
it would've taken three weeks of computing power.
So to protect project out to 2055, we had
to create a bespoke 2055 population.
Stats NZ projections don't go out that far.
Uh, and when we run that model in 2055, we find
that unsurprisingly, uh, as our population grows,
pressure on infrastructure increases, uh,
and traffic times increase, that's consistent
with experiences in all countries as they grow.
Uh, and so what about technology?
Will, will autonomous vehicles, uh, save us?
Well, in modeling our hypothetical example in Napier?
No, we don't think so. Uh, we think the introduction
of automated vehicles is highly plausible.
Um, 80% of travel in New Zealand Zealanders by car, uh,
automated trials of underway in the USA
China and the Middle East.
Um, but our analysis suggests that replacing private car use
with, uh, roboto taxis doesn't alleviate congestion.
In fact, it, it makes it worse.
Uh, and this one, we find that vehicle kilometers travel
actually increased 'cause the robot taxis have to move
around without people in them between trips.
It seems obvious after having done the analysis,
but it wasn't something we'd considered beforehand.
It's sort underwhelming. Right.
Uh, this tells us the transport system will face a range
of pressures over the next 50 years,
particularly in Auckland.
Uh, we'll need to use a range of tools
to address those pressures from new infrastructure like road
and rail, uh, public transport services to demand management
by the time of use Bill that, uh, you have just considered.
As with the treasury's long-term fiscal statement,
we don't try and model any particular
policy response in the response, though.
And with that, I'll welcome any questions.
Fa Fascinating personal background there
as well. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Mr. Gee. Yeah, thanks for that.
And really, uh, innovative approach to detecting, uh,
what might, what might come in the future.
Um, you, you,
I wanna ask a question about equity and access.
Um, you talked about the bespoke nature of projections, um,
with, with Monty.
Mm-hmm. How do issues like transport equity, access
to the transport network by vulnerable groups
and the like, how, how does that fit within the,
the Monty model?
Can you just talk me through
that sort of side of things? Sure.
Yeah. So the,
because we have a synthetic population in the model, um,
with the demographic attributes
that are representative of New Zealanders.
So we c we could bring that sort
of wider distribution analysis to understand, uh, access
for vulnerable or low income households, um, as well as,
as a, as a distribution impact, uh, transport equity, um,
across the whole demographic.
We just haven't got to that stage yet.
We've only been using it for a year in, in Ang.
So it's definitely something that's on our, our horizon.
And, and likewise for us for sort of considerations like,
um, climate resilience changes
and the like, which might, you know, in terms
of bespoke projections might be a bit more difficult to, um,
ascertain what that purely might look like
in, in a future period.
But that's part of the thinking as well.
Or, or is that already sort of built into some parts
of, of Monty?
Absolutely. No. So we have the ability to sort
of consider any future scenario.
Um, it's just how, how you craft that scenario, that's the,
the hard bit, I suppose.
So we could consider a, a future
under significant climate change where sea level rise as,
um, inundated most of the North island, for example.
And we could then, um, reduce access to the network based on
that sea level rise if we, if we wish to.
Again, it's, it's, it's part of the exploration
of sort of future things we can do.
Okay. And just one more question is on the role of, um,
regions and, and local government obviously have quite a,
a key role in terms of the transport network.
Um, a lot of that can change at a, at a local level.
So any comments on the applicability of, of, I take
that your point around, well, the model can flex to sort
of run a whole range of different scenarios
and what have you, but how is it resilient in the sense
of local direction, local decision making,
that changing dynamic at a local level?
So in terms of the network that we use, um,
which would be the like, largest thing that would change,
I suppose from a regional perspective?
We, um, we're currently using o Open Street map,
which is a sort of, uh, a public, uh, accessible network.
Uh, but a lot of the local government planning is already in
that for future years.
Um, so we are draw, we're drawing from that,
but obviously we could, um, parti, uh, as you see,
as you can see with the the Napier example,
we can isolate a particular region
and really concentrate on that network.
So if a regional council chose
to potentially use non future, we could, uh,
take their regional casual plan
and completely implement it right within the model
of futures sort for
Next. Okay. Um,
I'll check a few questions so we can start just
around, around the model.
Um, the, the assumptions you've, you've got,
that sounds pretty good in terms of how
the assumptions about human behavior, et cetera, uh,
map to, to reality.
Is all this all linked
to see nodding at the back there as well?
So is this all linked to the diary, um, travel diaries
and so on that you, you use as well?
Okay, that's pretty good.
Your, um, your ability to, um, uh,
model a range of different things you told us,
that's basically takes three days of computer power
to do the, um, the nap P one.
Mm-hmm. There's a, any number of different scenarios,
but, um, what I'm thinking is the ability to be able to,
at the moment you're doing it as a receiver effectively
saying, um, we get this, we, we assume this is gonna happen.
What does that look like? We assume
that's gonna happen, what's that look like?
But if you actually say, well, look,
what are all the possible scenarios to model those scenarios
and say, well, what's actually the best
scenario for New Zealand Inc.
Is the ability to be able to do that within the model.
And, and how much does that take?
I mean, you told us that that's computer power three days.
If you've got a person sitting there
for three days watching the computer, okay, tick,
tick, tick, the money's going up.
What? But if you haven't, you just said computer go off
and do your thing and you come
back and say, oh, what has it told
me? It's slightly different.
Yeah. So, um, I'll have a go and I'll encourage Dan
and Jay to, to to, but in if I, uh, misstep, so
Anybody else wants to come up to the table who needs
to help answer question come up,
Ruth, stay there as well. You know,
We've got plenty of seats. If
we, if we think about the, uh,
use the Napier Robo Taxii example, um, if you were
to try and optimize that, to eliminate the congestion,
so one of the assumptions in there was it was all there
were, there were all robax,
there was no private car ownership, uh,
and a hundred percent of trips were made by Rob taxis,
and that the occupancy
of those rob taxis was one per person.
Um, you could have rerun the model by tweaking some
of those things and then seeing what happens.
It's not three days. Depends on how long it takes you
to redo your, yeah, okay.
You can run 'em in parallel. Okay.
If you start with a, with a, I think this solution is going
to work and you need to do some sensitivity around it,
for example, three or four different scenarios,
you could run those in three days altogether.
It would then just take you three times as long
to do the analysis of, of that stuff,
or three times the amount of people.
Yeah. Um, in terms of the optimization, um, on a,
on a network basis, it's quite hard to sort of, uh,
understand where to place a road to optimize,
uh, everybody's travel.
So you're gonna inevitably make trade offs.
Um, and some of those may be in a equity space, some
of them may be in an access space.
Um, so from that perspective, it's hard to give that problem
to a computer and say, solve, um,
How would say, well, I, I was, I was envisaging the kind
of things of saying, Hey, um, for example, freight, okay,
we, we've got a lot more trucks.
Did we want more, um, transport on rail?
What does that look like? What's the lever you've gotta pull
to get that outcome of your urban planning?
And you said the interface with
urban planning needs some work on that.
You know, if you, if you let an Auckland or a Hamilton
or whatever do this, what does that look like compared
to saying, oh, actually we'd rather it does a bit more
of this go, what does that look like?
So it's the leisures that potentially Yeah.
Agencies can pull. And where I was also partly going to to
that is at the moment we've got this ministry, ministry
of transporting days long by was working on a, uh,
transport strategy, um, which was, you know,
back in the days of the Clark government.
Um, and then we went to the GPS.
And the GPS is much more ministerial fear,
which means there's a lot more chopping and changing.
Yeah. But we've been encouraged
to do things which are strategic,
longer term, longer lasting.
Mm. So if we can have that kind of picture,
which is what's the best sort of longer term look, you know,
that will fit better with infrastructure, commission's,
aspirations as well, what does that look like?
So it's that, it's those kind of things I'm looking, looking
At in the, in the pack we
provided on Monte as a diagram about
how we effectively choose options.
Mm-hmm. Um, on the right hand side, I think, uh,
the best way of describing that would be, you know,
we can model a huge range of scenarios
and then down select to, I think a good option, um,
as opposed to modeling only three
or four different scenarios.
I think that's where the, the ability that we have, um,
provides a, a potentially more rounded answer.
Maybe it's still suboptimal.
It's very difficult to get to that.
And you're getting clo you get closer. You're
Getting closer. Yeah. Um,
but it's definitely in that, in that stack
of scenarios, how do you pick good ones out of that?
And you have to make sure that your scenarios in the first
place are well designed.
And so before give the, the, the, um, speaking to,
to tool back to anybody else, is that the sort of thing
that you are looking to do as a ministry?
Okay, good. I'm, I'm liking that. That's excellent.
Thank you. Um, anybody else wanna pick one up?
Yeah, Julian, I'm on the list. Okay. No. Okay.
Okay, Greg. Alright,
Fine. I, um,
what New Zealand is a highly urbanized country.
Um, I, I remember sitting, my family farm is north
of Westport, and my brother who's on the farm was
bemoaning the state of the road.
And that all the money was going into Auckland.
And we sat there and counted vehicles going past the next
hour, and there were only about eight,
but they were all commercial vehicles.
They were milk tankers, coal trucks, various other things.
In this model, how do you, um, h
how, how do you wait?
The fact that for that road
and the cost of it, it was absolutely necessary
for the milk tankers versus the travel in Auckland.
Does the model do that?
Put, put value on the journey,
put the value for the economy on the journey? Not as such.
Um, we, that's a definitely sort
of a decision maker led process.
The moment we can inform that
by saying there's eight milk packs in that
Road, well, okay.
Does it feed into, so does does want, does the model somehow
put any, differentiate the value of a journey,
I suppose, I suppose is the question?
Well, we can, the value of the journey to the economy,
It, it, it can be imputed if, if people are doing,
for instance, cost benefit analysis
and they want to know how many cars are traveling or trucks
or whatever they happen to be on a given road
and how long it takes them.
And if you change a variable how that journey time changes,
Monte can help you do that. Yeah.
Because I mean, if it, if that row is out of commission
for, is, is there a model you have out of commission
what the impact will be, the economic impact
of having a road outta commission
where there's only one way in and out?
Yes. And most of the traffic is
Commercial Yeah.
Versus a road out in Auckland where there are alternatives.
Yeah. So we can absolutely, yeah,
you can absolutely turn a link of the network off, so a road
and then watch what happens when you rerun it
and where the trucks go.
Um, so that's, that is some of the things we use it for.
Alright. Okay. Thank you.
That is a good question because I think Greg's point in
that case is there would be no trucks
because you wouldn't be able to get there or back.
But I think it's a very good point about what's the economic
impact of any given road, particularly really they ask,
many of them are screaming out for that.
Julianne and then Carlos,
Thank you so much.
Um, thanks for your very clear presentation
and stories to illustrate as well.
That's really helpful. Um, I actually just had a couple
of kind of technical questions initially,
and I just, it was, you mentioned that, um,
stats New Zealand doesn't have population productions
and for 2055,
So they do, they don't have a, a, a two those.
I see, I see. It's very broad.
Sorry, sorry, very, very broad.
Just say that again, but bit louder. So,
So the Staff New Zealand do produce a whole
of nation population projection, I think at
to 2070 or something.
Um, but they don't produce one acts, uh,
a lower spatial resolution. So,
So that makes it hard to do transport modeling.
It makes it very hard to do transport modeling.
Yes. Okay. So it's quite difficult
to do transport modeling 30 years in the future.
How hard would it be to do transport modeling
60 years in the future?
Very hard,
Extremely hard, Extremely hard
to accurately model travel demand
more than 30 years in the future.
Well, even 30 years in the future, given
what we know about the reliability
of stats New Zealand's population projections.
Yes. Which have consistently tended to undershoot,
um, on immigration.
So the New Zealand's population,
if you look at the actual outturns versus projections over
time, says nzs projections have been consistently
conservative compared to what's actually happened.
Mainly because they're, I think, trying it's migration.
They find it d very, very difficult to, uh,
forecast migration because that sits
as a policy choice rather than a, a variable
that's up to them to
My favorite topic. You gotta stop Kim.
Yeah, we gotta stop on that. Just
how does the multimodel like, 'cause it's, it's,
and it's also trying to work on where the dispersal
of people demographics go.
So, you know, to the point about Yeah, that's fine.
Inability. Well, the difficulty modeling out,
how do you take into account the feedback of
what the model projects making choices,
like say more investment
because Auckland's projected to, um, grow from immigration.
So investment goes there, which is sort of self-fulfilling.
And then West coast commercial roads don't get the invest.
How do you avoid the self-fulfilling feedback loops
Talking about land use not Being, yeah.
Um, so you're right.
We don't consider land use at the moment in
our, in our model.
Um, we, we do consider the impact
of an intervention.
So if we were to say
that the roads on the west coast were degraded to the point
where you can't use them anymore, um,
the model has the ability to understand
what the local population would do in those cases now.
And then from an economic perspective, you could back
that into some economic analysis, which said, you know,
and this is the drain on the country from not having
that access to that road.
Um, what the differential
between investment in one place versus investment
and another, another place from a pure
transport model perspective.
Um, it doesn't take
That into No, I get, I under, I understand that it goes,
that it doesn't make the political decision about where
to invest and what sort of country to, to design.
But it that, I mean, um, you know, using the model
to Auckland's incredibly important of course,
using the model to model Auckland every single time,
you know, so what is it a third of the population that sort
of pulls Grant Robax example from Napier
and your great soliloquy at the start was doable, all
of us about, um, Christchurch, um, it's like if, if we,
if the model is modeling places to grow
and then figuring out how to make it grow, does that, how,
how, how are you building into your ability
to use this system a like a
blinding effect on your,
on the ministry of Transport itself?
How, you know, if you're constantly modeling Auckland, so
how are we gonna improve Auckland's transport?
We're gonna invest in Auckland for modeling in Auckland.
We design, everyone's talking about that.
How do you drag the eye and look at another part? Okay,
So, so one of the good things about the model is
because it is nation nationwide, when you do a run,
if you do a, a change in Auckland, it actually says, well
what, what does that have in terms
of a flow on effect for the whole country?
Because those, those freight journeys
that start in Auckland, they end somewhere often
outside of Auckland.
So you make changes in Auckland
and actually does flow through the, the whole country
Finals. Just, yeah,
I think it's actually quite a good, I mean it's a good
reflection for us as, as well
to think about if we look back a year
and I guess we've had it been running for a year in a couple
of years, if we look back and see what we've modeled
and what we haven't, it's
probably a good check for us to think.
Are there things, questions not asking Monty
that we should be asking Monty that would pick up?
Are we not looking at areas of the country we should be,
I guess? Yeah, well I guess
there's a quick, like if, if they, um,
you know, Taiwan grows, um, based on people wanting
to get out of Auckland because of bad traffic
and all of a sudden the traffic's improved in Auckland
and um, say even though your projection say it's gonna get
slower and, um, and on both time and speed
and people then go to toga and,
and then it's like, well, did you mo Yeah, I guess
what you've said describes the whole
Country. I'm just
worried about some feedback,
Luke. Yeah,
It is. I guess it is a related
question. Okay.
Yeah, I mean, you've said obviously you're trying not
to take into account any policy decisions
and just see what things are,
but like, could the model be used to see what the impacts
of EKTR on of different investment choices?
Yes. And that might be useful if EKT is like a proxy for
cost congestion, emissions, et cetera.
Yes,
Carlos, Think to chair, well,
my question is your model should be based on
how the city being, um, the future planning.
Am I correct? So are we based on the current way
of planning our city
or we based on, there's some factors there.
Like for example, in Auckland, if we got another, uh,
I I can see there's a huge increase in
population in 20 years time.
Are we good city planning?
Like, you know, wider the city or they going to build up?
I mean that, that affect the whole different model.
So, um, so what, what are you guys based on at the moment?
So at the moment it's based on the land transport
network as it currently exists.
We haven't yet built in a module that allow
that changes land use that would lead to changes in the,
in the shape of the city.
Uh, that's a development area that we're looking to
Develop. So you didn't
actually refer to the past 10 years how,
for example, Auckland, how much, you know,
new area being developed.
You didn't put that into the consideration, am I correct?
Because for example, I saying 10 years ago, fab Bush
as a, as a farmland.
Yeah. Now, 10 years later on whole FB Bush is
for residential area.
Do that take, did this model, taking this into account
how the city will be developed in 10 years time?
So the, the base simulation, um,
that we compare everything to in 2055
is predicated on 2023 network, uh, 2023,
uh, population.
So it would've taken into account
the previous 10 years worth of
So what, so what I'm saying is the more dose is only based
on the current city painting.
So assume that there's no new software
or new areas being developed in Auckland. Am I correct?
It's a comparative model.
So the, the future scenario, you're correct.
In the, the 2055 scenario,
we considered didn't necessarily consider any potential
future plan change to Auckland, um,
other than a population growth.
Um, and that's to a certain extent reflected in the, in the,
uh, the answers the model gave around
reductions in travel time, I'm sorry, increases.
So that, that model will not be inaccurate.
Um, p that was happening in 10 years time
because just look at our past 10 years,
the city size in Auckland is growing dramatically
and there's a lot of LiveOps being created as well.
But you're telling me that your model didn't put
that into a consideration with,
with more new softwares being created, you know,
outside the, the city central because
otherwise they will actually increase.
There's a lot of, you know, um, uh, traveling time as well.
Like for example, 10 years ago, not a lot
of people live in Tarini, so they don't need
to travel pack, need to see the center.
But if you don't put
that into consideration into your model, how can you equity
that the, the travel income in 20 years time?
So if we, if we were
to create a credible 20 year scenario,
I think we could take the bulk of the land transport plan
for Auckland and whatever, whatever urban design they have,
uh, that is currently available.
And we could implement that as a, as a potential scenario.
Um, in this case we were looking at a 2055 national
scenario, and at that point it was very difficult for us
to consider all network changes, um, on the same basis.
So we, we chose not to do any thought,
Because for my, my questions more like,
because we know that if the, if the city grow tall
or go by size Yep.
They will be very different in
traveling council. Absolutely. That's right.
And I, I think that's, that's, that's
where I was going at the beginning with
that question about the urban form.
So in terms of the, the Auckland City plan, um, that allows
for both this and that, and the question's gotta be,
and it'll be way over the capacity, which will happen
with whatever the growth, um, amount is.
The question's gonna be what's the balance of the, the,
the densification versus the, the green fields.
And, and actually in modeling that, if you can do that kind
of thing, you could then say, well, here are the transport
outcomes, which one actually works better.
Yeah. So the,
we could certainly model those two different scenarios,
but trying to pick a central one at
how it will actually play out pretty fraught if you think
about the way in which the a can plan processes
role politically where it was doing this
and then it was doing this and then it was doing this.
Yeah, no, I understand. It was doing this.
So it just becomes quite
Difficult. I think my question really
is, if you said, okay,
we know we've got, we expect XX people on the basis
of a long-term
immigration strategy, which we don't actually have.
So that makes life very difficult.
One day we, one day we'll grow up and do it.
Um, I've got one quick question.
Uh, yeah, no, I I but,
but if you were to say, okay,
so we expect 300,000 extra people
and the plan allows for 3 million extra people
or 2 million extra people, I believe it's whatever.
Um, and you said that, okay, there's 300,000 people are all,
you know, dense corridors on PT routes and et cetera.
What does that look like?
And 300,000 people in Greenfield, what does that look like?
And here, Auckland Council, here in New Zealand government,
that is the implication of that.
You might wanna think about what your choices would be.
That would be a really powerful and useful tool.
Are you talking Auckland? Yeah.
So we're, we're we're collaborating with Auckland Council on
that land use model development.
Yes. So in effect, we'd, we'd have a, a wrapper
around Monty, which would provide that land use variation.
We can then model the transport outcomes based on their
scenarios, feed that back into, um, their modeling.
So you, you could then get closer to, uh,
an optimized picture of urban design.
That would be very powerful, very useful. Anywhere.
It's very early days, but yeah. Yep. Um, you
Okay, Carlos? Yep. Yes.
I'm quite interesting. One of your data as well,
you modeling only 10% of people went to work?
No, we're, we're modeling a 10% sample of the population.
Yes. Uh, which would represent 10%
of the people doing 10% of the, of all activities.
So just like 10% of my time is going
to work. Is that what you mean?
No, It's, it's,
Think Of it like a polling sample.
We're using a 10% sample to get a representative picture of
what might happen just simply to save on computing power.
But this, what is the effect to the real life? Only 10%.
Jade, Uh, Jade McKay, chief Transport modeler,
uh, what we're actually doing is that, uh, we are
ning the resolution of the simulation such
that each agent represents 10 people.
And that's what we mean by a 10% sub sampling.
Okay, Thank you. So the full population is represented.
It's just the resolution of the simulation,
which is very highly resolved in that international context.
Um, for this kind of model, for any kind of model, um,
has the, each agent has the weight of 10 people,
But when they say when to work, is
that also including those ethnicities during work as well?
Thank you. Yeah, sure.
I make the observation that political polls are done about
two 10000th, I think it is.
Hmm. So, um, 10 percent's a pretty big number ca um, cam,
Um, yeah, it flies on a little bit from that actually.
'cause trying to try to model universe, you'd have
to rebuild the universe.
So you've done one big course in samples down to 10%,
another one, this is super, you know,
and all the factors that play in like, you know, um,
illnesses, uh, I know education, but also weather.
And then this one that I'm just reading through,
I think sparked my interest.
Um, Monte dollars.
Can you explain how a multi dollar
operates on the, on the simulation?
So it's just a, effectively, we have parameters
that represent costs in the real world.
Uhhuh, uh, cost for car travel, for example,
would be road user charges
or fuel excise dt, um, cost for public transport fairs.
Um, the, the dollar conversion factor, if that's
what you consider to Monte dollars, uh, is, uh,
not quite a one-to-one to
New Zealand dollar, New Zealand dollar.
Yeah. So when we're modeling a toll rate, for example,
we need to understand what the toll impact is.
Um, uh, a Monte dollar does not equate to the,
the actual dollar value of the toll
That you're, so how does the cost
of not using the toll road get accounted for?
So, or not using the, um, travel time
or waiting for a bus,
or like how do you, things
that don't have a current dollar value, um,
say using a car park that's part of the tar seal network,
like how do those things get accounted for?
Mm-hmm. Uh, so those kinds of things, uh,
basically people's behavior.
So that, that's the problem of, um, of kind of transporting
behavior in the real world into the simulation.
And this is the, and,
and this is the challenge of calibration.
So when we calibrate the parameters that correspond to, uh,
the dissatisfaction with waiting for a bus,
the dissatisfaction with driving the satisfaction
of performing some activity, we calibrate those, uh,
parameter, those model parameters to meet observation,
uh, we can then do further.
And included in that, included in that is, um,
is the dissatisfaction
for paying a toll on New Zealand's existing toll road. It's
Interesting. So you're equating the,
the Monte dollars
of satisfaction measure.
Are you polling people at a bus stop? Are you going Right.
10 people using this car park get this much satisfaction,
but one person using the cycle road?
Because with the cycle lane
In general, not polling people in
general observing people.
So it is all based on observations. Oh.
It's more based on observations than, uh, people's polling.
Okay. So ask this, this question then.
So if, if, um, a business has got four car parks in front
of it and then a cycle lane's put in
and those, how, how do you measure,
how do you observe the value for the business owner,
the people who then get to drive the car and park, or the
however many people might use that cycle lane, um, over
that time, whether it's one person an hour or 20.
Like how do you, how do you make that,
I mean, at the end of the day, it's a transport model,
so it's not gonna consider business owners, um, wellbeing.
Um, it's gonna consider the effectively the utility
of having that cycle lane versus having those car
parks in the grand scheme.
Um, so from a pure agent choice perspective,
and that's the behavioral change that we're, we're trying
to model, you know,
there's only three real choices for that agent.
It's around the mode that it takes to do a journey time
that it, it leaves and the route that it can take.
Um, so within that, we can then construct
a value framework around optimum transport routes, um,
the changes to that network in terms of a cycle lane versus,
um, those four car parks at the grand scheme may be,
uh, a change to mode shift.
So more people would take the cycle to work, for example,
um, potentially may then use their
Car final clarify, how does
that feed into the multi dollar?
That's the,
That value? Like
how are you, how does the Monte dollar,
so the Monte dollar is a, is is,
is effectively a consideration of how well
that agent is fulfilling its daily plan.
It's a mix of utilitarian and satisfaction. Absolutely.
Yeah.
I just wanna ask you a question about the,
the LTIB um, exercise.
So how valuable is this ex?
Is this exercise, the exercise of putting this together,
being and then coming and presenting this?
Obviously we're in the middle of doing that and you know,
and presenting this to us.
Is it a valuable process?
And then I've got a follow up question back as well.
Um, we in all of our work, like
to keep an eye on the future and, and,
and possible future outcomes.
Um, I don't want step too much into the,
into the policy space here.
I know that there are considerations around it. Yeah,
That's what I'm asking.
Yeah.
Sort of being a little bit careful.
Um, I think that, uh, in writing the,
in writing the LT and then reflecting over the last few days
before presenting to you, I think I did find it, um,
very, uh, useful.
'cause it, it, it does force us to think, well,
what are the factors over which we do have control
as policy, um, advisors.
Uh, and uh,
that's always good just to keep in front of mind.
Yeah. And my question then, o obviously follows on,
if there were fewer of these, I'm for free
and frank advice, if there were three fewer of these
or only one of these, how would you incorporate this kind
of, 'cause you know, I'm finding this fascinating,
potentially really powerful tool.
How would that turn up in a meaningful way in front
of a select committee
or select committees if it was one LTIB
and it wasn't written by MOT?
So MOT it's just one of a lot
Of Agencies contributing.
Well, there's never any, any, uh,
anything stopping the select committee from inviting us
to talk to you, uh, about anything we'll always,
uh, make ourselves available.
Um, uh, there'd be, would this not required?
There's no way I would not have Monty doing what Monty does
and, um, considering it in, in all
of our advice using it in, in our policy advice.
And we're always, uh, open to come and talk to you
About. Okay. But the aware,
the awareness
of the Parliament in whichever way it was done of Monty
and of the potential power of that tool
and the ways in which you could use that tool Mm.
Would that come through?
This has been a unique opportunity to be able
to showcase it in a way that we wouldn't have been able to.
Yeah, we, it's, it's been on our website.
Um, we've,
we've got a conference next week up in
Auckland Transport Knowledge Conference.
I, I, I don't think members will be attending.
Um, metallic is quite excited.
They've done their concert at the same time.
Dojo Cat, uh, dojo Cat Metall will also come
to the Transport Knowledge Conference.
Uh, but yeah,
It's Model is and the political, uh,
Your ticket's more expensive.
Okay. We, we did get aright when we had
to book our flights actually.
Oh my. Why is it so expensive? But a okay. Right. Okay.
Um, other questions before I go
and monopolize another one? Great.
Um, yes, just in on page 17, you're talking about the, um,
core simulated mode.
She's got cable car in there.
Um, now obviously welling, as far as I'm aware,
there's only one paying, um,
cable car, which is in Wellington.
So it's, I'm interested that it's in there.
But secondly too, my impression is that most
of the people catch the cable car tourists.
So at least 50% is, is there a way in, in this model,
does it tell you that, that most
of the people on there are tourists, so
therefore if it's not there,
it won't have such an impact on transport
because the tourists will just go somewhere else?
So is that, I'm just trying to understand how the,
how far we break down the activity on these things. Mm-hmm.
I think the observation would be present in the simulation
that most of the volume on the cable car would be tourists.
That is the people going to work.
The count of the agents who use the,
who are doing work journeys would be very, very low.
The the numbers doing the portion doing
work journeys is very low. That's
Right. Therefore,
So therefore, how does that impact on modeling?
Because I mean, this is, this is,
So, I I I would say more that just the reality is, uh,
produced in the simulation in this context,
I think is there a consequence,
I'm not sure if there necessarily a consequence of
that except to say that the number
of people using this service is low and
therefore we might not,
one might not think it's efficient in a, in a utility sense.
Sorry, it just probably goes back
to my other question about the, the, the knowing the purpose
of the journeys mm-hmm.
I suppose is the, is the real question I'm asking,
going back to my original question around the, where
majority of the journeys on this road from Westport to
during the day, our commercial journeys mm-hmm.
Yeah. Road logs.
Yeah. And, and the model knows that it's
Calibrated, the model does Know that.
Yeah. It's calibrated to real world data
that's traveling up and down that road.
So there's two, two ways we can understand the current
data in that, from that perspective,
there's the household travel survey, which, uh,
we undertake on, uh, sort of quarterly basis.
Um, and that gives us information about work journeys,
leisure journeys, uh, education.
Um, and then there's observed, uh,
traffic monitoring system accounts that NZTA collect
where we can understand the split
between heavy commercial light commercial
and passenger vehicles.
Would that be physical? Is
That where people were standing literally the No.
So it all, it, it used to be like that
and those, those counts still happen.
Um, but it's an automated system on state highway network.
The reason the cable car is in there
is, is partially my fault.
I wanted to include a mode. You
Was could,
I wanted to include a mode that, um, was non-traditional,
so not a car or a bus or, or something like that.
And, and just for, uh, to prove
that we could actually develop that within the model.
So that's, that's the reason there.
Another reason the cable car is the, is
because all of the public transport schedules
and services are in the simulation.
Cable, car theories,
Buses, theories there.
Yep. Yep. Okay. Right. Oh, sorry.
So this is like the sub sson? Yes. Sub. Okay. Right.
Sorry, GV. Oh
Yeah. So, um, 'cause I
know that some people are looking at, uh,
gondolas for Queenstown public transport.
Uh, would gondola be similar
to cable car or is it different?
Is it, can it be, I
Think it would have be used considered in the
Model. You, you could
cont you could consider
it as a bus to be honest.
Oh, okay. Um, yeah, the fact that's
More frequent, like
because it operates in a different way,
The frequency, uh, you can change the frequency.
So we have the ability to change
the frequency of all public.
Ah, I see, I see. Um, so it's sort of
whatever you want to, to consider. Right.
Okay. Is this a sub ones? Yeah, okays.
Yeah. So what, so what about like aquatic export?
Like, um, these, uh,
Yes. Yeah.
Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Alright.
Ferries are in there. Fair enough.
Yeah. The only mode that we don't currently consider is,
um, domestic aviation, and that's on our development
List. Yeah. Okay.
Carlos? Yes.
I just want to focus on page 22 on the robot taxi.
Like, can you give us a little bit how, how that, um,
discrimination work?
Like, because you also mentioned on 25 there's a limitation
on the current scenario or, or current model as well.
So is those robot taxi including those, uh, Uber
or dd like those, um, part-time taxi being used,
you know, as, as commercial vehicle or,
or just traditional taxi?
Okay. So, um, the, the model considers them just to be,
uh, a driverless car, um, that is available
for an agent to, um, pickup
at any one point in time.
Um, we don't consider necessarily the sort
of ordering system.
There is a wait time that is considered,
but that's basically based on
where the robot taxii is relative
to the agent on the network.
Um, otherwise it's just literally that a car that drives
Is because one of your, one of your model is used
to estimate the numbers of taxis serving the population.
But we know that with uh, Uber, with DD that can,
you know, the numbers of vehicle
provided to the CV can be different
at different time as well.
So it's not like a fixed amount of numbers
provided service at a given time.
So have you put that into the consideration or,
or this is something too complicated to put into the model?
No, and I, I think we did try to outline
that we haven't optimized the number of railroad taxis
and we haven't optimized that time tabling
or scheduling, um, uh, of those taxis within the day.
Uh, but for this given scenario, I think if we wanted to,
that is something we could actually consider.
So, so what you, what you comment on page 25 is you,
you think this model additional robot
scenario insight can be, can be improved
or obtained, is is there something we can do or, or,
or improve the modeling system?
Ruth, Can I just make a point about the,
the robot Xi I mean part of it is, is was for doing it
for the, is to illustrate what Monty can do.
So, um, uh, so we weren't trying to do it as something
that we would like a policy
would be producing or anything like that.
So, um, just useful to take that into account.
Sure. Um, a couple of questions from me then, um,
I'll take up to up to that.
Uh, ten two just
after, um, regional variations is an interesting one
because, and the regions, I just encourage you
to think about the region slightly differently.
Um, because the, the, in terms
of population changes in particular central North Island,
which is probably a bit of horizons, man, Twon, a bit
of w Cato and so on is quite clearly de it's depopulating at
the moment and that that region variation won't flow
through this 'cause it's gonna be captured in Waikato
and captured in Manawa two I I suspect in those two areas.
The other area is Otago, which you go, there's a lot
of growth, but Otago is two different places as well.
You've got Central Otago
and Queenstown, which you clearly growing a little fast
and the Dunedin side, which isn't.
So again, it just be worth as you are developing this,
thinking about those things, um, just on freight, um,
you've got, I'll be really interested
because we've got this, the aspiration to double exports,
which will include some volume in the next 10 years,
let alone, you know, 30 years.
Um, do you done any thinking about if you plugged in
something around, because the consistent message you get
about Kiwi rail, we're getting better,
but price is a real, is a real barrier.
So if you see one of the inva interventions we're gonna do
is we're gonna make rail more attractive
because somehow, you know, what does that look like if it's,
you know, more price effective, um, and
therefore more, uh, bulk product et cetera goes on the,
on the railway as opposed to on the, uh, on the road.
Can you model those sort of things.
And there's also, there's a really quite spectacular graph
you've got on page, um, 11, which is part of that, uh,
which is the truck, the truck numbers.
Uh, that graph is close to a doubling
of truck numbers since the GFC according to that.
What, what, what's driven that so much that quickly.
So two parts to that question, in a sense all about freight.
So yes, that we can definitely consider it scenarios where
more, more, uh, road freight is taken by rail.
Mm-hmm. Definitely something we can consider, um,
why truck numbers have increased.
Um, I presume it is linked to population
as well. Um, it's a
Lot faster population growth spend in that
Time, but also, um, it might be due to online shopping
and uh, greater numbers of, uh,
manufactured goods just being required to be transported
Might be so, so yeah, so so our understanding of
that would be really, because that's a really significant
shift in terms of volume, heavy of,
I presume all these are heavy vehicles, not,
they're not little courier vans.
Yeah. Is it, is it,
Is it, is it heavy or medium duty as
Well? It will include medium
duty, so sorry,
it will include everything above, um, 3.5 tons. 3.5 tons.
Yeah. So it's not gonna be your courier van.
It's gonna be reasonably heavy vehicles by and large. Yeah,
We can, we can get back to you
on the exact right down. We'll just,
Yeah, We can get back to you on the, in the, on the,
but over that similar sort of period, we,
we have seen a similar concomitant compliant in, um,
in rail freight volume in
Terms of that. Yeah. So, okay. That's,
that's,
that's a really significant thing to
Understand. Yeah, yeah.
The rise of trucks does, does mirror the decline
of the decline of rail volumes.
We'll follow that with um, other parties too.
So I'd be interested a bit more of that. And look,
my last question is around, um, EVs
and energy, which is on page 16.
Um, and we talked about EVs,
but I dunno whether that's still true,
the 2030 being roughly comparable,
but it's the interface of EVs with the energy system,
both positive and negative
and whether you've actually looked at that,
'cause obviously energy fits within this, um,
select committee's purview as well.
Have you, have you looked at that?
Do agents have to refill their vehicles?
No, we, we can't implement that
So no, not yet.
Not yet. Okay. That 'cause that'd be really interesting
'cause it could be a plus and a minus depending on
how it interfaces works the system.
Okay. Look, um, we've,
we've come pretty much to the end of our time.
Um, so thank you. But can I just say what is the,
I mean if there are things which you said, you know,
invite you in any time on this,
but if there are things which we
as select committee will say, well look
what would the future look like?
'cause we should be thinking about long-term futures.
What would the future look like if we pulled this lever,
this lever and this lever, you know,
or push pause on that lever.
That's the kind of thing that you are doing thinking about.
So it'd be really interesting to know what kind
of scenarios you are thinking about
and then trying to optimize our overall transport system
and the way it interfaces with that.
As Greg asked with our economy, we're largely guided
By our ministerial priorities have. Yes.
But if we could update you next year on what we are
sometime at some point next year, but we, what we do
With Ponte, well, we'll,
We'll have you in front of us for,
Um, scrutiny week.
So yes, that's just in a month
Time. So they're probably not mean.
We talk a little bit
More about it then. No. But have
a little bit of a think about it for that,
for that, um, time.
We've got you there. Um, because I think
it could be very powerful tool.
No. Can I just ask one other thing?
One thing we haven't uh, asked about
or touched on is the summary
of submissions from the public consultation.
Um, is it appropriate to ask? Yeah, go for it.
A question on that now? Yeah.
Um, I, I note that you received 10 submissions.
Was what was your sort of view on that?
Were you expecting more? Were you expecting
That seems a low number.
It's a low number. Okay.
I I, I don't think that's unusual compared
to all other government departments.
I think there's a really variable number.
It tends not to be high, I think with the exception
of the treasury's long term fiscal,
which gets more feedback a little bit
More I guess when I look at the 10
and you say they're from individual, central,
local government and interest groups.
That's a lot of groups for, for 10. So
It's One like could you just, maybe not now,
but just give us a little bit more detail about the 10.
Yeah, I Absolutely, I thanks.
Absolutely Greg. Yeah. Very quickly, what
Type of, one more in this model
is there room for a shock?
Like, I mean look at my lifetime.
The, the great oil shocks of the seventies
and eighties, you know, when all of a sudden changed,
that was when no one even thought about energy
and all of a sudden once energy was everything,
is this model taken into account
that could be something similar.
You, you could model a shock of some sort.
Be it a, a massive earthquake that takes out a, a road
or a section of roads or a,
or a significant change in you simulate is a significant
change in places for transport.
You could artificially make cars look very expensive due
to something like an energy price shock.
Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. Look, really
Appreciate it. It's been fascinating
conversation. Yeah, thank you.
Thank you. And we'll look forward
to some further conversations, uh,
and, uh, understanding a bit more of what Monty can do and
Deliver. Thank you. Thank
you. Thanks colleagues.